# Contributing to the Ably Flutter Plugin

## Getting Started

The code in this repository has been constructed to be
[built as a Flutter Plugin](https://flutter.dev/docs/development/packages-and-plugins/developing-packages#plugin).
It is not yet constructed as a federated plugin but this is in our backlog as
[issue 118](https://github.com/ably/ably-flutter/issues/118).

After checking out this repository, run the following command:

    flutter pub get

You may also find it insightful to run the following command, as it can reveal issues with your development environment:

    flutter doctor

If using Android Studio, delete the `.packages` file. It is a deprecated autogenerated file which confuses Android Studio into thinking all files  are build outputs instead of source files.

## Implementation Notes

### Interfaces

The `Realtime` 'interface' is an [abstract class](https://dart.dev/guides/language/language-tour#abstract-classes)
which seems to be the correct way to do this in Dart - every class has an
['implicit interface'](https://dart.dev/guides/language/language-tour#implicit-interfaces) and then you make the
class abstract to present it as a more traditional interface as understood by the perhaps a Java programmer.

### Exceptions and Errors

Dart libraries don't _extend_ the [Exception class](https://api.dart.dev/stable/2.4.0/dart-core/Exception-class.html),
they _implement_ its implicit interface.
(see [this comment](https://stackoverflow.com/questions/13579982/custom-exceptions-in-dart#comment18616624_13580222)).

For the moment it would not seem appropriate for our plugin to throw instances conforming to the implicit interface
of the [Error class](https://api.dart.dev/stable/2.4.0/dart-core/Error-class.html), as this is perhaps more
appropriate for programmer's failures on the Dart side of things. But time will tell.

## Platform Notes

### Android

The Android project does use [AndroidX](https://developer.android.com/jetpack/androidx), which appears to be the default specified when Flutter created the plugin project, however Flutter's Java API for plugins (e.g. [MethodChannel](https://api.flutter.dev/javadoc/io/flutter/plugin/common/MethodChannel.html)) appears to still use deprecated platform APIs like the [UiThread](https://developer.android.com/reference/android/support/annotation/UiThread) annotation.

### iOS

Once changes have been made to the platform code in the [ios folder](ios), especially if those changes involve changing
[the pod spec](ios/ably_flutter.podspec) to add a dependency, then it may be necessary to force that build up stream with:

1. Bump `s.version` in the pod spec
2. From [example/ios](example/ios) run `pod install`
3. Open [Runner.xcworkspace](example/ios/Runner.xcworkspace) in Xcode, clean and build

Otherwise, after making simple code changes to the platform code it will not get seen with a hot restart "R".
Therefore if there's a current emulation running then use "q" to quit it and then re-run the emulator - e.g. with this if you've
got both iOS and Android emulators open:

    flutter run -d all

## Debugging notes (Android Studio)

To debug both platform and dart code simultaneously:
- In Android: in the flutter project window, launch the application in debug mode in Android Studio. Then, in the Android project window, attach the debugger to the Android process.
- In iOS: In the flutter project window, launch the application in debug mode in Android Studio. Then, in Xcode, on the menu bar, click `Debug` > `Attach to Process` > `Runner`.

## Helpful Resources

- Flutter
[plug-in package development](https://flutter.dev/developing-packages/),
being a specialized package that includes platform-specific implementation code for Android and/or iOS.
- Flutter
[documentation](https://flutter.dev/docs), offering tutorials, 
samples, guidance on mobile development, and a full API reference.


## Generating platform constants

Some files in the project are generated to maintain sync between
 platform constants on both native and dart side.
  Generated file paths are configured as values in `bin/codegen.dart` for `toGenerate` Map

[Read about generation of platform specific constant files](bin/README.md)

## Implementing new codec types

1. Add new type along with value in `_types` list at [bin/codegen_context.dart](bin/codegen_context.dart)
2. Add an object definition  with object name and its properties to `objects` list at [bin/codegen_context.dart](bin/codegen_context.dart)
 This will create `Tx<ObjectName>` under which all properties are accessible.
 
Generate platform constants and continue

3. update `getCodecType` in [Codec.dart](lib/src/platform/src/codec.dart) so new codec type is returned based on runtime type
4. update `codecPair` in [Codec.dart](lib/src/platform/src/codec.dart)  so new encoder/decoder is assigned for new type
5. update `writeValue` in [android.src.main.java.io.ably.flutter.plugin.AblyMessageCodec](android/src/main/java/io/ably/flutter/plugin/AblyMessageCodec.java)
 so new codec type is obtained from runtime type
6. update `codecMap` in [android.src.main.java.io.ably.flutter.plugin.AblyMessageCodec](android/src/main/java/io/ably/flutter/plugin/AblyMessageCodec.java)
 so new encoder/decoder is assigned for new type
7. add new codec encoder method in [ios.Classes.codec.AblyFlutterWriter](ios/Classes/codec/AblyFlutterWriter.m)
 and update `getType` and `getEncoder` so that new codec encoder is called
8. add new codec encoder method in [ios.classes.codec.AblyFlutterReader](ios/Classes/codec/AblyFlutterReader.m)
 and update `getDecoder` so that new codec decoder is called

## Implementing new platform methods

1. Add new method name in `_platformMethods` list at [bin/codegen_context.dart](bin/codegen_context.dart)

Generate platform constants and use wherever required

## Static plugin code analyzer

The new flutter analyzer does a great job at analyzing complete flutter package.

Running `flutter analyze` in project root will analyze dart files in complete project,
 i.e., plugin code and example code


Or, use the good old dart analyzer

```bash
dartanalyzer --fatal-warnings lib/**/*.dart

dartanalyzer --fatal-warnings example/lib/**/*.dart
```

## dartdoc

### Tool Installation

With just the Flutter tools installed, the following is observed:

```
ably-flutter % which dartdoc
dartdoc not found

?1 ably-flutter % which flutter
/Users/quintinwillison/flutter/bin/flutter
```

The `dartdoc` tool can be activated via the `flutter` command like this:

```
ably-flutter % flutter pub global activate dartdoc
Resolving dependencies...
Downloading...
Precompiling executables...
Precompiled dartdoc:dartdoc.
Installed executable dartdoc.
Warning: Pub installs executables into $HOME/flutter/.pub-cache/bin, which is not on your path.
You can fix that by adding this to your shell's config file (.bashrc, .bash_profile, etc.):

  export PATH="$PATH":"$HOME/flutter/.pub-cache/bin"

Activated dartdoc 0.39.0.
```

And, indeed, on inspecting my path I could confirm that it wasn't present:

```
ably-flutter % echo $PATH
/Users/quintinwillison/.asdf/shims:/Users/quintinwillison/.asdf/bin:/usr/local/bin:/usr/bin:/bin:/usr/sbin:/sbin:/usr/local/MacGPG2/bin:/usr/local/share/dotnet:~/.dotnet/tools:/Library/Apple/usr/bin:/Users/quintinwillison/Library/Android/sdk/platform-tools:/Users/quintinwillison/flutter/bin
```

So I edited my configuration to add the `PATH` export suggested:

```
ably-flutter % vi ~/.zshrc
ably-flutter % source ~/.zshrc
ably-flutter % echo $PATH
/Users/quintinwillison/.asdf/shims:/Users/quintinwillison/.asdf/bin:/usr/local/bin:/usr/bin:/bin:/usr/sbin:/sbin:/usr/local/MacGPG2/bin:/usr/local/share/dotnet:~/.dotnet/tools:/Library/Apple/usr/bin:/Users/quintinwillison/Library/Android/sdk/platform-tools:/Users/quintinwillison/flutter/bin:/Users/quintinwillison/Library/Android/sdk/platform-tools:/Users/quintinwillison/flutter/bin:/Users/quintinwillison/flutter/.pub-cache/bin
```

And I was then able to find the `dartdoc` tool:

```
ably-flutter % which dartdoc
/Users/quintinwillison/flutter/.pub-cache/bin/dartdoc
```

And see that it had been installed globally in the Flutter context:

```
ably-flutter % flutter pub global list
dartdoc 0.39.0
```

### Generating Documentation

```
ably-flutter % dartdoc
Documenting ably_flutter...
Initialized dartdoc with 195 libraries in 180.4 seconds
Generating docs for library ably_flutter from package:ably_flutter/ably_flutter.dart...
Validating docs...
  warning: dartdoc generated a broken link to: DeveloperNotes.md, linked to from package-ably_flutter: file:///Users/quintinwillison/code/ably/ably-flutter
found 1 warning and 0 errors
Documented 1 public library in 5.6 seconds
Success! Docs generated into /Users/quintinwillison/code/ably/ably-flutter/doc/api
```

## Release Process

Releases should always be made through a release pull request (PR), which needs to bump the version number and add to the [change log](CHANGELOG.md).
For an example of a previous release PR, see [#89](https://github.com/ably/ably-flutter/pull/89).

The release process must include the following steps:

1. Ensure that all work intended for this release has landed to `main`
2. Create a release branch named like `release/1.2.3`
3. Add a commit to bump the version number
4. Add a commit to update the change log. 
  - Autogenerate the changelog contents by running `github_changelog_generator -u ably -p ably-flutter --since-tag 1.2.0 --output delta.md` and manually copying the relevant contents from `delta.md` into `CHANGELOG.md`
  - Make sure to replace `HEAD` in the autogenerated URL's with the version tag you will create (e.g. `v1.2.1`).
5. Push the release branch to GitHub
6. Open a PR for the release against the release branch you just pushed
7. Gain approval(s) for the release PR from maintainer(s)
8. Land the release PR to `main`
9. Execute `flutter pub publish` from the root of this repository
10. Create a tag named like `v1.2.3`, using `git tag v1.2.3`
11. Push the newly created tag to GitHub: `git push origin v1.2.3`
12. Create a release on [GitHub](https://github.com/ably/ably-flutter/releases) following the previous releases as examples.

To check that everything is looking sensible to the Flutter tools, without publishing, you can use:

    flutter pub publish --dry-run

We tend to use [github_changelog_generator](https://github.com/skywinder/Github-Changelog-Generator) to collate the information required for a change log update.
Your mileage may vary, but it seems the most reliable method to invoke the generator is something like:
`github_changelog_generator -u ably -p ably-flutter --since-tag v1.2.0 --output delta.md`
and then manually merge the delta contents in to the main change log (where `v1.2.0` in this case is the tag for the previous release).
